---
title: "Autism Is Despair"
date: 2023-07-03T22:07:20-04:00
draft: false
Section: blog
categories:
  - "Parenting"
---

This is a strong title to lead with, autism is despair.  My son was diagnosed with ASD, Autism Spectrum Disorder, during the pandemic.  He's a great little kid and we obviously love him as much as our neurotypical older son.  I wasn't sure if I should write this post, I have had a lot of different feelings about this situation over the years.  It has both been rewarding and depressing.  I have learned a lot, some of which have been helpful in my growth as a parent and some things I wish I could remain blissfully naive.  My relationship with my spouse has been strained and forever altered.  The amount of pseudoscience in the Autism community is astounding and terrifying all at once.  Please, dear reader, don't think that I am talking about you or anyone you know; these are just my feelings and ramblings put to print because I have no one else to tell them to.  Over the years I have come to appreciate the absolute darkness and despair in the diagnosis of autism.

## Detection

My son was conceived and carried to term with no abnormalities in the pregnancy nor the delivery.  We lived, inseperable, together in the hospital and spent many long nights at home with a cranky baby, the sort of life every parent recognizes.  We never really thought too much of it, how often our son was mad and how long it would take him to settle back down.  One day he stood up, babbling, and walked to my wife.  Everything was going well, just like with our older son; we saw the possibility and the future walking.  Every day after this we talked with him, waiting for the day he would talk back; we didn't know how long we would be waiting for him to say his first real words.  when he was two we noticed that he would be fixated on spinning his brother's bicycle wheel.  At this time he still wasn't talking and his anger never really subsided, he was so quick to anger and it took so long to resolve.  We got ourselves placed on the waiting list for a developmental pediatrician who could evaluate our son, but it would take 6 months for this to happen.  We looked around for any alternative and there was no qualified individual with a more favorable schedule.  So we waited.  

## Services

Eventually he was diagnosed with ASD and we immediately sought services but it was a real challenge due to the pandemic.  Many special needs clinics in our area were not designated as essential services and so they closed.  Finding services for autism is awful, full stop.  The difference between good and bad ASD services is like breathing water and air but we didn't know how to tell the difference early on and so we drowned for awhile.  Autism is a spectrum and every kid has different needs so what may work well for one may not work well for another.  Autism centers typically handle kids with the more severe ASD symptoms as they are not able to be well integrated with mainstream school systems.  However, traditional special needs programs in schools varies just as much as the autism centers and finding a "good" program can mean one where they just don't ignore your child for hours at a time.  One thing we have seen with autism centers, occupational therapy, and speech therapy is if they are an in-network provider the chance of them being effective is really really low.  Providers are paid by insurance companies at a rate that is either the medicare rate or some percentage above the medicare rate.  This number is going to be really low, they still have to pay the behavioral technicians... so you should wonder how much less are they paying them.

For those familiar with ASD can recognize the autism centers I mentioned are "Applied Behavioral Analysis", or ABA, therapy.  This is by-far the most common form of therapy for kids with ASD.  There are a couple of parties involved with an ABA program, the BCBA and the BT.  A BCBA is the one that is expected to be an expert in their profession and are able to design, implement, and supervise therapeutic programs to help address symptoms with ASD.  A BCBA will work with a BT to carry out the program, you can think of the BCBA-BT relationship as a supervisor and a worker at a factory, the BCBA is an expert in designing widgets and can make them directly but a BT is only able to carry out the instructions to make widgets.  It's a bad analegy, sorry.

## Schools

## Social Groups

## Relationships

## Pseudoscience

## My Feelings
I have strugled with my feelings for a long time.  When my son was first diagnosed I secretly cried while my family was in bed.  At the time it felt like all my hopes and dreams for my son were crushed into dust and there was nothing I could do about it, he had autism and his life would be a hard one full of doctors, bullys, and charlatans.  Over time I have reflected on those particular feelings and changed the goals, as long as he has a happy productive life that is free from trauma and he can live independently when I'm gone that will be enough.  He is only six, there is time to discover what he is good at and help him integrate with the world that doesn't want him.  I sometimes still cry about this and I can't tell anyone because the narrative around ASD is that every kid is a miracle and we should all be so lucky to have one.  Additionally, I am a man and "men don't cry" we just bottle it up and die young; what a pain that is.  When we are out with a group of neurotypical kids I see how they behave and I secretly wish my son was the same, and for all the shame that brings I can also never tell anyone that.  Every day my spouse finds a new miracle supplement sold by some chiropractor with a youtube following and if I push back or question it I'm a jerk that is stressing her out and I should just shut up.  It doesn't matter how little sense it makes or how nonexistent the evidence is, I should just shut up.  If I question where the information comes from I'm ignorant, if I question anything I am nonsupportive.  In the mind of my spouse I am the cause of my son's ASD, no matter how hurtful this is to me.  The resentment between us has grown so sharp and cruel that we no longer care about the words and rocks we sling.  I know where this is going and realistically there is no way to repair it; I am still paying for mistakes I made 12 years ago so how can we rally and overcome this.  I am in envy of every parent with a "normal" child and I can never bring myself to try to have another one because the fear of ASD is so great.  I feel alone, like every day I am masking who I am and how I feel in order to push through for the family and to do the best I can.

## Conclusion
Life is tough.  Everyone in life has their own struggles, some people have it better and some have it worse.  If you have read this post then I am surprised, I have no online following and I won't share this.  If you found it offensive, sorry; this is simply my life experience and how I feel, it wasn't written for anyone but myself.  This wasn't a judgement of any other person, everyone is trying their best.  I have learned a lot and it's helped me to be more patient and caring.  My feelings for my kids haven't changed and I feel the same about bother my NT and ND children.  The best we can do is to try to help and that is what I strive to do, even when I make mistakes.  Have a good life and be kind.
